Guide for osquery event tables (#7734)
fleetdm/fleet: articles/osquery-evented-tables-overview.md

-- [Process auditing](#process-auditing)
-- [Yara scanning](#yara-scanning)

# Osquery evented tables

## What are osquery evented tables? 
Osquery traditionally allows you to see the state of your computers right now. This point-in-time snapshot, however, requires you to actively watch the table repeatedly. For example, in the security-critical `processes` table, a process might be very short-lived and there is high churn in processes. Actively watching and diffing this table would be challenging even with automation.

This is where osquery's evented tables come in. Rather than displaying the point-in-time state for your host, osquery's evented tables store the host's historical data. You can configure osquery to capture certain types of information, after which it will be stored in the relevant `*_events` table for later analysis. 

This guide will walk you through the concepts, considerations, and best practices for setting up evented tables, in particular focusing on osquery. It will also provide basic information about commonly-used evented tables for a newcomer to get started.

## How do osquery evented tables work?

> Osquery does not generate the events itself. Instead, it reads and formats event data generated by system utilities. For example, on Linux, audit generates process and socket event data in its own storage location and format. Osquery reads data from audit’s storage location, converts it into an event row, and buffers them (in the internal [rocksdb](http://rocksdb.org) store) in the `process_events` and `socket_events` tables to await querying. The data can then be filtered and transformed via SQL, and shipped to a log destination with the scheduled query functionality. 

Reviewer: > audit generates process and socket event data in its own storage location and format

I am not the most well versed with audit on Linux, but is this necessarily true? I think it's more accurate to say something like `audit kernel component collects these records/messages and sends it to the auditd daemon which may create a log entry`, or we can skip the explanation and say something along the lines of `it uses audit under the hood`

Author: You're right. There's a difference between audit and auditd. Auditd will collect the data in some location. Audit simply broadcasts it. Will update.

> For the purposes of this article, we will use the term "utility" to mean the underlying OS utility that osquery subscribes to for its various evented tables. 

Reviewer: > we will use the term "utility" to mean the underlying OS utility

I still think it is cleaner to have `underlying OS APIs/functionality` and not use the word utility there

Author: Quite a mouthful, I think as long as we define our terms up front, we'd be ok. What's wrong with utility?

Reviewer: > Quite a mouthful 

I disagree on this :) How is that a mouthful? `underlying OS utility` --> `underlying OS APIs` or `underlying OS components`? 

> What's wrong with utility?

Utility in this context usually means that it's a program/binary on the system. This would imply that we are shelling out to that binary, which is not the case. We are using the same underlying APIs that that program would use.

Reviewer 2: How about

> the underlying OS capabilities

Avoids all the baggage that widespread webdev has clouded the words "API" and "components" with (has semantic competition with ideas like REST APIs and UI components).

Author: I've updated the first few lines to be more explicit that it is using an underlying OS component, not an OS utility. 

I still think defining the term utility up front is sufficient. And I'm not sure our intended audience will have the distinction between shelling vs. the underlying API in mind, or if they did, they would mind this distinction between elided. 

I would like to ship this and if our intended audience doesn't get it due to this distinction, then we can fix. Our original requester can read it and tell us. I also have sent it to someone else who expressed interest in this article.

Reviewer: Sounds good to me, thanks @zhumo

This separation between osquery and the utility means that some evented tables rely on configurations for the utility to determine which events will be generated. At the utility level, you can specify what data is captured and at the osquery level, you can specify what information is ingested, presented, and transmitted. For most evented tables, osquery works great out-of-the-box with the utility’s default configurations,but some use cases may require adjusting the utility configuration.

## How do I know whether a table is evented?
You can tell that an osquery evented table is evented in two ways:

- The table ends in `_events`.
- In the (osquery schema)[osquery.io/schema], the table is  marked with an "evented" tag near the table name as shown here:

IMAGE NEEDED HERE

## What do I need to consider when configuring evented tables?

> ### Performance impact
> Running event capture generates performance overhead from both the utility and osquery. In general, if the utility is configured loosely to generate more events, then the host is performing additional operations matching and generating the events. This further causes osquery to do more work to parse and store the extra generated events. For example, when monitoring processes, there may be frequent but low-value processes such as `awk` and `sed` which can be ignored by the utility, reducing work for the host. Collecting “good enough” data is a key method to mitigate performance impact.
> 
> Furthermore, at the osquery level, the number, complexity, and frequency of queries will drive the compute resources required. Queries which utilize `WHERE` clauses will be relatively efficient (and minimize data volume), whereas many `JOIN`s or wildcards (`%`) will use more resources.
> 
> Nevertheless, you may find it necessary to allocate a larger  memory footprint to osquery to satisfy your requirements. Osquery's watchdog automatically kills queries if they exceed certain system usage. Watchdog's behavior can be adjusted with the following flags:
> * `--watchdog_memory_limit` changes the maximum memory usage (expressed in MBs)
> * `--watchdog_utilization_limit` changes the maximum number of CPU cycles (defined as the `processes` table's `user_time` and `system_time`) for more than the time in seconds set by `--watchdog_latency_limit`.
> * `--watchdog_delay` sets the delay in seconds before CPU and memory usage limits will be enforced. By default, this is 60.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Performance impact

Capturing event data can be costly. The more events you are watching, the larger the load on the host. Capturing only the events you need will cut down on the amount of work osquery needs to do in order to capture and parse data.  For example, when monitoring processes, there may be frequent but low-value processes such as `awk` and `sed` which can be ignored, reducing work for the host. Collecting “good enough” data is key in managing performance impact.

Also, consider the impact of the queries you’re using to collect your event data.  Queries using `WHERE` clauses will be fairly efficient (and minimize data volume), while many `JOIN`s or wildcards (%) will use more resources. 

Even after considering all of these factors, you may need to give osquery some additional resources. Osquery's watchdog automatically kills queries if they exceed certain system usage. By default, the watchdog will allow osquery to use 200MB of memory with up to 25% CPU usage for 9 seconds. This can be adjusted with the following flags:

* `--watchdog_memory_limit` changes the maximum memory usage (expressed in MBs)
* `--watchdog_utilization_limit` changes the maximum number of CPU cycles (defined as the processes table's user_time and system_time) for more than the time in seconds set by --watchdog_latency_limit.
* `--watchdog_delay` sets the delay in seconds before CPU and memory usage limits will be enforced. By default, this is 60.

```

@zhumo, I took a quick pass at simplifying the language in the Performance impact section. I'm happy to go over the rest as well if you feel this is a value add!

Author: Thanks I took a bunch of your comments. Definitely the language is easier to follow. I did add back some stuff because it started to elide concepts that I think are important to keep separate.

Author: I'd appreciate any further sections you want to review though. It's much better after that one pass.

Osquery applies pre-specified YARA rules to incoming events in the `file_events` table to populate the `yara_events` table. As such, it requires the following flags:
* `--disable_events=false`
* `--enable_file_events=true`

With the appropriate flags set, then specify the appropriate YARA rules in the osquery configuration using the format as described [here](https://osquery.readthedocs.io/en/stable/deployment/yara/#yara-configuration).

More topics and useful links for YARA:
* [Osquery's YARA scanning guide](https://osquery.readthedocs.io/en/stable/deployment/yara/#continuous-monitoring-using-the-yara_events-table)
* [How to write YARA rules](https://yara.readthedocs.io/en/stable/writingrules.html)
* [Repository of example YARA rules](https://github.com/Yara-Rules/rules)
* [Collection of use YARA resources by InQuest](https://github.com/InQuest/awesome-yara)
* [YARA performance guidelines](https://github.com/Neo23x0/YARA-Performance-Guidelines/)

> ### Other tables

Author: @sharvilshah In this table, we have some blanks. Would you mind looking these up and filling this in?

These other event tables are also available in osquery. We will provide more information for them in other guides. 

| Table name | OS | Flags |
| :- | :-- | :-- |

> | apparmor_events | linux | --audit_allow_apparmor_events=true |

Reviewer: nit: MacOS should be `macOS` and linux should be styled `Linux`

> | disk_events | MacOS

Reviewer: `disk_events` and `hardware_events` do not require any additional flags, apart from the global `--disable_events` one

| hardware_events | MacOS, linux | 

> | seccomp_events | linux |

Reviewer: `seccomp_events` will require `--audit_allow_seccomp_events` flag

| selinux_events | linux | --audit_allow_selinux_events=true |

> | syslog_events | linux | 

Reviewer: `syslog_events` also does not require any additional flag to enable it

| user_interaction_events | MacOS |
| user_events | Linux | --audit_allow_user_events=true |
| ??? | ??? | --audit_allow_fork_process_events=true |

> | ??? | ??? | --audit_allow_kill_process_events=true |

Reviewer: This is both for `process_events` table on Linux. `--audit_allow_fork_process_events` will enable capturing `fork` syscall, and `--audit_allow_kill_process_events` will enable capturing `kill` syscall

For the purposes of this article, we will use the term "utility" to mean the underlying OS utility that osquery subscribes to for its various evented tables. 

This separation between osquery and the utility means that some evented tables rely on configurations for the utility to determine which events will be generated. At the utility level, you can specify what data is captured and at the osquery level, you can specify what information is ingested, presented, and transmitted. For most evented tables, osquery works great out-of-the-box with the utility’s default configurations,but some use cases may require adjusting the utility configuration.

## How do I know whether a table is evented?
You can tell that an osquery evented table is evented in two ways:

The table ends in `_events`.
In the (osquery schema)[osquery.io/schema], the table is  marked with an "evented" tag near the table name as shown here:

> IMAGE NEEDED HERE

Author: @chris-mcgillicuddy I'm not sure how to add images into the article... I was thinking something like this?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5359586/189983213-f614dafc-0dbc-4772-915f-1fa4de1bc424.png)

Reviewer 2: @zhumo https://fleetdm.com/handbook/digital-experience/article-formatting-guide#images-and-screenshots

The choice of utility depends on your situation. Some relevant considerations are:
- Audit has earlier support (>2.6 ) compared to eBPF (>4.18)
- Only one consumer of audit’s logs are allowed at a time. The `--audit_persist=true` flag will set osquery to retry connection to audit logs.
- Audit has limited visibility inside containers
- The audit table and the eBPF table return slightly different data

Overall, Fleet recommends you try both and compare results for your use case.

To use the `bpf_process_events` and `bpf_socket_events` tables, use the flag `--enable_bpf_events=true`. See [these instructions](https://osquery.readthedocs.io/en/latest/deployment/process-auditing/#linux-process-and-socket-auditing-using-bpf) for more information. 

To use `process_events` and `socket_events` with the audit framework, use the flags `--disable_audit=false --audit_allow_process_events=true --audit_allow_socket_events=true`. See [these instructions](https://osquery.readthedocs.io/en/latest/deployment/process-auditing/#linux-process-auditing-using-audit) for more information. 

#### Process auditing on macOS

> On macOS, there are two utilities that enable osquery process auditing: [OpenBSM](https://github.com/openbsm/openbsm) and the [EndpointSecurity](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/endpointsecurity). Fleet recommends using the EndpointSecurity implementation because it is intended to replace OpenBSM. EndpointSecurity is available starting macOS 10.15.

Reviewer: If you think it's necessary, we can also explicitly mention here that Apple has deprecated OpenBSM and it is slated for removal in some future macOS version

* `--enable_file_events=true`

With the appropriate flags set, then specify the appropriate YARA rules in the osquery configuration using the format as described [here](https://osquery.readthedocs.io/en/stable/deployment/yara/#yara-configuration).

More topics and useful links for YARA:
* [Osquery's YARA scanning guide](https://osquery.readthedocs.io/en/stable/deployment/yara/#continuous-monitoring-using-the-yara_events-table)
* [How to write YARA rules](https://yara.readthedocs.io/en/stable/writingrules.html)
* [Repository of example YARA rules](https://github.com/Yara-Rules/rules)
* [Collection of use YARA resources by InQuest](https://github.com/InQuest/awesome-yara)
* [YARA performance guidelines](https://github.com/Neo23x0/YARA-Performance-Guidelines/)

### Other tables
These other event tables are also available in osquery. We will provide more information for them in other guides. 

| Table name | OS | Flags |
| :- | :-- | :-- |
| apparmor_events | linux | --audit_allow_apparmor_events=true |
| disk_events | MacOS
| hardware_events | MacOS, linux | 
| seccomp_events | linux |
| selinux_events | linux | --audit_allow_selinux_events=true |
| syslog_events | linux | 

> | user_interaction_events | MacOS |

Author: @sharvilshah how about this one?

Reviewer: `user_interaction_events` will require `--enable_keyboard_events=true` and `--enable_mouse_events=true`
